Running a federation with GaNDLF Documentation (#794)
intel/openfl: docs/running_the_federation_with_gandlf.rst

.. # Copyright (C) 2020-2023 Intel Corporation
.. # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _running_the_federation_with_gandlf:

******************************
Run the Federation with GaNDLF

> ******************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
****************************************************
Run the Federation with a model defined using GaNDLF
****************************************************
```

> This guide will show you how to take an existing GaNDLF experiment to a federated environment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will show you how to take an existing model using the [Generally Nuanced Deep Learning Framework (GaNDLF)](https://github.com/mlcommons/GaNDLF) experiment to a federated environment. 
```

`Aggregator-Based Workflow`_

>     Define an experiment and distribute it manually. All participants can verify model code and [FL plan](https://openfl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/running_the_federation.html#federated-learning-plan-fl-plan-settings) prior to execution. The federation is terminated when the experiment is finished

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Define an experiment and distribute it manually. All participants can verify model code and [FL plan](https://openfl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/running_the_federation.html#federated-learning-plan-fl-plan-settings) prior to executing the code/model. The federation is terminated when the experiment is finished, and appropriate statistics are generated.
```

.. _running_the_federation_aggregator_based:

Aggregator-Based Workflow
=========================

An overview of this workflow is shown below.

.. figure:: /images/openfl_flow.png

.. centered:: Overview of the Aggregator-Based Workflow

- `Bare Metal Approach`_
- `Docker Approach`_

This workflow uses short-lived components in a federation, which is terminated when the experiment is finished. The components are as follows:

> - The *Collaborator* uses a local dataset to train a global model and the *Aggregator* receives model updates from *Collaborators* and aggregates them to create the new global model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The *Collaborator* uses a local dataset to train a global model and sends the model updates to the *Aggregator*, which aggregates them to create the new global model.
```

> - The *Aggregator* is framework-agnostic, while the *Collaborator* can use any deep learning frameworks, such as `TensorFlow <https://www.tensorflow.org/>`_\* \  or `PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/>`_\*\, or `GaNDLF <https://github.com/mlcommons/GaNDLF>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The *Aggregator* is framework-agnostic, while the *Collaborator* can use any deep learning frameworks, such as `TensorFlow <https://www.tensorflow.org/>`_\* \  or `PyTorch <https://pytorch.org/>`_\*\. `GaNDLF <https://github.com/mlcommons/GaNDLF>` provides a straightforward way to define complete model training pipelines for healthcare data, and is directly compatible with OpenFL.
```

> This guide will demonstrate how to take an existing GaNDLF configuration file (i.e. for segmentation), embed this within the Federated Learning plan (FL plan) along with the Python\*\  code that defines the model and the data loader. The FL plan is a `YAML <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>`_ file that defines the collaborators, aggregator, connections, models, data, and any other parameters that describe the training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will demonstrate how to take an existing [GaNDLF model configuration](https://mlcommons.github.io/GaNDLF/getting_started/) (e.g., for segmentation), embed this within the Federated Learning plan (FL plan) along with the Python\*\  code that defines the model and the data loader. The FL plan is a `YAML <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>`_ file that defines the collaborators, aggregator, connections, models, data, and any other parameters that describe the training.
```

  :language: bash

However, continue with the following procedure for details in creating a federation with an aggregator-based workflow.

    `STEP 1: Create a Workspace on the Aggregator`_

        - Creates a federated learning workspace on one of the nodes.

    `STEP 2: Configure the Federation`_

        - Ensures each node in the federation has a valid public key infrastructure (PKI) certificate.
        - Distributes the workspace from the aggregator node to the other collaborator nodes.

    `STEP 3: Start the Federation`_

.. _creating_workspaces:

STEP 1: Install GaNDLF prerequisites and Create a Workspace
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1.	Start a Python 3.8 (>=3.7, <3.11) virtual environment and confirm |productName| is available.

	.. code-block:: python

		fx

2.     Install GaNDLF (if not already)  
    .. code-block:: console

        git clone https://github.com/mlcommons/GaNDLF.git
        cd GaNDLF
        git checkout 0.0.14
        pip install torch==1.8.2+cpu torchvision==0.9.2+cpu torchaudio===0.8.2 -f https://download.pytorch.org/whl/lts/1.8/torch_lts.html
        pip install onnx==1.12.0

>         pip install -e .

Reviewer: Removing explicit instructions because these are already old (for 0.0.14), and I think it would make sense to have GaNDLF-specific installation instructions in a single place.
```suggestion
2.     [Install GaNDLF from sources](https://mlcommons.github.io/GaNDLF/setup/#install-from-sources) (if not already).
```

> 3.     Create GaNDLF's Data CSVs for 3D Segmentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.     Create GaNDLF's Data CSVs. The example below is for 3D Segmentation using the unit test data:
```

    +---------------------------+--------------------------------------------------+

    where **AFQDN** is the fully-qualified domain name of the aggregator node.

.. _workspace_export:

Exporting the Workspace

1. Export the workspace so that it can be imported to the collaborator nodes.

    .. code-block:: console

       fx workspace export

   The :code:`export` command will archive the current workspace (with a :code:`zip` file extension) and create a **requirements.txt** of the current Python\*\ packages in the virtual environment. 

2. The next step is to transfer this workspace archive to each collaborator node.

.. _install_certs_colab:

**On the Collaborator Node**:

Importing the Workspace

1. Copy the :ref:`workspace archive <workspace_export>` from the aggregator node to the collaborator nodes.

2. Install GaNDLF (if not already)  

    .. code-block:: console

        git clone https://github.com/mlcommons/GaNDLF.git
        cd GaNDLF
        git checkout 0.0.14
        pip install torch==1.8.2+cpu torchvision==0.9.2+cpu torchaudio===0.8.2 -f https://download.pytorch.org/whl/lts/1.8/torch_lts.html
        pip install onnx==1.12.0

>         pip install -e .

Reviewer: (Same as above) Removing explicit instructions because these are already old (for 0.0.14), and I think it would make sense to have GaNDLF-specific installation instructions in a single place.
```suggestion
2.     [Install GaNDLF from sources](https://mlcommons.github.io/GaNDLF/setup/#install-from-sources) (if not already).
```

           +-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
           | Optional Parameters     | Description                                             |
           +=========================+=========================================================+
           | -p, --plan_config PATH  | Federated Learning plan [default = plan/plan.yaml]      |
           +-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
           | -d, --data_config PATH  | The data set/shard configuration file                   |
           +-------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

3. Repeat the earlier steps for each collaborator node in the federation.

  When all of the Collaborators connect, the Aggregator starts training. You will see log messages describing the progress of the federated training.

  When the last round of training is completed, the Aggregator stores the final weights in the protobuf file that was specified in the YAML file, which in this example is located at **save/${WORKSPACE_TEMPLATE}_latest.pbuf**.

Post Experiment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Experiment owners may access the final model in its native format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experiment owners may access the final model in its native format. Once the model has been converted to its native format, inference can be done using [GaNDLF's inference API](https://mlcommons.github.io/GaNDLF/usage/#running-gandlf-traininginference).
```
